After looking at the insight
profile in the last section, we
have both good news and bad news.
The good news is that our
intuition about the cost of
data transfers was correct.
The device-to-device copy
on the left is significantly
faster than the device-to-host
copy in the middle.
This confirms that the PCIe
transfer is the real bottleneck.
The bad news is that, despite using
separate systems, compute is still
waiting for the copy to finish.
That seems puzzling.
Didn't we just separate them
into different streams to
avoid this serialization?
It turns out this isn't
entirely bad news.
It means that there's more to learn
about how the GPU hardware works.
To understand why our copy
and compute operations didn't
overlap, we need to look at
how memory actually works.
Your program uses virtual memory,
which is divided into pages.
Most of the time, these pages
are backed by physical RAM.
But if RAM is short on space,
the operating system can swap
pages out to disk.
As a result, at any given
moment, you can't be entirely
certain whether a particular
page is in RAM or on disk.
To make sure a page remains
in physical memory, we can
page lock or pin it.
By pinning pages, we tell
the operating system it's
not allowed to move them to disk.
So how does this relate to GPUs?
As it turns out, a GPU
can only read from pinned,
page-locked memory.
That raises a question, though.
We haven't done anything special
when transferring data between
the CPU and GPU, so how did
that work up until now?
Behind the scenes, the CUDA
runtime uses a small pinned buffer
as a staging area for transfers.
When we copy data from
regular pageable memory,
The driver moves a chunk of
data into this staging buffer,
sends that chunk to the GPU, waits
for it to finish, and then repeats.
This process effectively makes
the copy synchronous, blocking any
chance of overlap with computation.
The good news is we can avoid
this by allocating pinned
memory ourselves.
In Thrust, this is as simple
as using a universal host
pinned vector instead of a
regular host vector.
By doing so, we bypass the
hidden staging step and enable
truly asynchronous transfers that
can overlap with our GPU workloads.
Which brings us to the next
optional exercise that you'll
find in this section.
In this exercise, you'll allocate
pinned memory by using a universal
host pinned vector Instead
of a regular host vector,
After making that change,
you can run your application
under Insight Systems again
and look for the device to
host copy in the timeline.
Observe if it now
overlaps with Compute.